Installation
============

If you prefer to work on the source, clone the repository
::

   git clone https://github.com/eth-cscs/abcpy.git

Make sure all requirements are installed
::
   
   cd abcpy
   pip3 install -r requirements.txt

To create a package and install it do
::

   make package
   pip3 install pip3 install build/dist/abcpy-0.1-py3-none-any.whl

Note that ABCpy requires Python3.

Getting Started
===============

Here we show how to use ABCpy to infer parameters of model, given observed some
data. As a simple example we consider a Gaussian model, where we want to model
the height of grown up humans given the following set of measurement
(observation, observed data).

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 5
    :dedent: 4

Now, we want to model the height of humans by a Gaussian model which has
parameters mean, denoted by :math:`\mu`, and standard deviation, denoted by
:math:`\sigma`. The goal is to use ABC to infer these yet unknown parameters
from the information contained in the observed data.

A pre-requisite for ABC is that we provide certain *prior* knowledge about the
parameters we want to infer. In our case it is quite simple, we know from
experience that the average height should be somewhere between 150cm and 200cm,
and the standard deviation is around 5 to 25.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 8-10, 12-13
    :dedent: 4

Further, we need a means to quantify how close our observation is to synthetic
data (generated by the model). Often the real and synthetic observations cannot
compared directly in a reasonable of efficient way. Thus, *summary statistics*
are used to extract relevant properties from the observations, with the idea the
these stastistics then compared.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 16-17
    :dedent: 4
	     
As a distance we chose the LogReg distance here. Note that in ABCpy distance
functions operate not on the observations, but on summary statistice.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 20-21
    :dedent: 4	    

We can now setup a inference scheme -- let us chose PMCABC as our inference
algorithm of choice. As a pre-requisit it requires a perturbation kernel and a
backend. We define both in the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 24-27, 30-31
    :dedent: 4

We instanciate an PMCABC object and pass the kernel and backend objects to the
constructor:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 34-35
    :dedent: 4	    

Finally, we need to parametrize and start the actualy sampling:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 38-41
    :dedent: 4
	     
With this the inferrence process is done and the probabilities of the inferred
parameters are stored in the journal object. See `Post Analysis`_ for further
information on extracting results.

The code currently uses the dummy backend `BackendDummy` which does not
parallelize the execution of the inference schemes, but is very handy quick
prototyping and testing. To execute the code you only need to run

::
   
   python3 gaussian.py


The full source can be found in `examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py`.

Post Analysis
=============

The output when sampling from an inferrence scheme is a Journal
(:py:class:`abcpy.output.Journal`) which holds all the necessary results and
convenient methods to do the post analysis.

For example, one can easily access the sampled parameters and corresponding
weights using:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 48-49
    :dedent: 4

For the post analysis basic functions are provided:	    

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 52-53
    :dedent: 4
	     
Also, to ensure reproducibility, every journal stores the parameters of the
algorithm that created it:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 57
    :dedent: 4
	     
And certainly, a journal can easily be saved to and loaded from disk:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/dummy/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 60, 63
    :dedent: 4
	     
	    
Using the Spark Backend
=======================

To run ABCpy in parallel using Apache Spark, one only needs to use the provided
Spark backend. Considering the example from above, the statements for the
backend have to be changed to

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/backends/apache_spark/pmcabc_gaussian.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 29-32
    :dedent: 4

In words, a Spark context has to be created and passed to the Spark
backend. Additionally, the level of parallelism can be provided, which defines in
a sense in how many blocks the work should be split up. It corresponds to the
parallelism of an RDD in Apache Spark terminology. A good value is usually a
small multiple of the total number of available cores.

The standard way to run the script on Spark is via the spark-submit command:

::
   
   PYSPARK_PYTHON=python3 spark-submit gaussian.py

Often Spark installations use Python 2 by default. To make Spark use the
required Python 3 interpreter, the `PYSPARK_PYTHON` environment variable can be
set.

The adapted python code can be found in
`examples/backend/apache_spark/gaussian.py`.
   
Note that in order to run jobs in parallel you need to have Apache Spark
installed on the system in question. Details on the installation can be found on
the official `homepage <http://spark.apache.org>`_. Further, keep in mind that
the ABCpy library has to be properly installed on the cluster, such that it is
available to the Python interpreters on the master and the worker nodes.


Using Cluster Infrastructure
============================

When your model is computationally expensive and/or other factors require
compute infrastructure that goes beyond a single notebook or workstation you can
easily run ABCpy on infrastructure for cluster or high-performance computing.

Running on Amazon Web Services
------------------------------

We show with high level steps how to get ABCpy running on Amazon Web Services
(AWS). Please note, that this is not a complete guide to AWS, so we would like
to refer you to the respective documentation. The first step would be to setup a
AWS Elastic Map Reduce (EMR) cluster which comes with the option of a
pre-configured Apache Spark. Then, we show how to run a simple inference code on
this cluster.

Setting up the EMR Cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When we setup an EMR cluster we want to install ABCpy on every node of the
cluster. Therefore, we provide a bootstrap script that does this job for us. On
your local machine create a file named `emr_bootstrap.sh` with the following
content:

::
   
   #!/bin/sh
   sudo yum -y install git
   sudo pip-3.4 install ipython findspark abcpy

In AWS go to Services, then S3 under the Storage Section. Create a new bucket
called `abcpy` and upload your bootstrap script `emr_bootstap.sh`.

To create a cluster, in AWS go to Services and then EMR under the Analytics
Section. Click 'Create Cluster', then choose 'Advanced Options'. In Step 1
choose the emr-5.7.0 image and make sure only Spark is selected for your cluster
(the other software packages are not required). In Step 2 choose for example one
master node and 4 core nodes (16 vCPUs if you have 4 vCPUs instances). In Step 3
under the boostrap action, choose custom, and select the script
`abcpy/emr_bootstrap.sh`. In the last step (Step 4), choose a key to access the
master node (we assume that you already setup keys). Start the cluster.


Running ABCpy on AWS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Log in via SSH and run the following commands to get an example code from ABCpy
running with Python3 support:

::
   
   sudo bash -c 'echo export PYSPARK_PYTHON=python34 >> /etc/spark/conf/spark-env.sh'
   git clone https://github.com/eth-cscs/abcpy.git

Then, to submit a job to the Spark cluster we run the following commands:

::
   
   cd abcpy/examples/backends/
   spark-submit --num-executors 16 pmcabc_gaussian.py

Clearly the setup can be extended and optimized. For this and basic information
we refer you to the `AWS documentation on
EMR <http://docs.aws.amazon.com/emr/latest/ManagementGuide/emr-overview.html>`_.
   

	    
Implementing a new Model
========================

Often one wants to use one of the provided inference schemes on a new model,
which is not part of ABCpy. We now go through the details of such a scenario
using the Gaussian model to exemplify the mechanics.

Every model has to conform to the API specified by the abstract base class
:py:class:`abcpy.models.Model`. Thus, making a new model compatible with ABCpy, essentially boils down to implementing the following methods:

.. literalinclude:: ../../abcpy/models.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 6, 13, 35, 61, 69, 88

In the following we go through a few of the required methods, explain what is expected, and
show how it would be implemented for the Gaussian model.

As a general note, one can say that it is always a good  idea to
consult the reference for implementation details. For the constructor, the reference states the following:

.. automethod:: abcpy.models.Model.__init__
   :noindex:

Consequently, we would implement a simple version of a Gaussian model as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_python/pmcabc_gaussian_model_simple.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 5-9

Here we actually initialize the model parameters by calling :py:class:`abcpy.models.Model.sample_from_prior`, which is another functions that must be implemented.
Its requirements are quite simple:

.. automethod:: abcpy.models.Model.sample_from_prior
   :noindex:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_python/pmcabc_gaussian_model_simple.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 24-26

Let us have a look at the details on implementing :py:class:`abcpy.models.Model.set_parameters`:

.. automethod:: abcpy.models.Model.set_parameters
   :noindex:
      
For a Gaussian model a simple implementation would look like the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_python/pmcabc_gaussian_model_simple.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 11-19

Note that :py:class:`abcpy.models.Model.set_parameters` is expected to return a boolean dependent on whether the provided parameters are suitable for the model. Thus, we added a few tests to the method.


For the remaining methods that must be implemented, namely :py:class:`abcpy.models.Model.get_parameters`
and :py:class:`abcpy.models.Model.simulate`, we proceed in exactly the same way. This leads to an implementation that might look like the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_python/pmcabc_gaussian_model_simple.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 21- 23, 27-29

Our model now conforms to ABCpy and we can start inferring parameters in the
same way (see `Getting Started`_) as we would do with shipped models. The
complete example code can be found `here
<https://github.com/eth-cscs/abcpy/blob/master/examples/gaussian_extended_with_model.py>`_


Wrap a Model Written in C++
---------------------------

There are several frameworks that help you integrating your C++/C code into
Python. We showcase examples for

* `Swig <http://www.swig.org/>`_
* `Pybind <https://github.com/pybind>`_

Using Swig
~~~~~~~~~~

Swig is a tool that creates a Python wrapper for our C++/C code using an
interface (file) that we have to specify. We can then import the wrapper and
in turn use your C++ code with ABCpy as if it was written in Python.

We go through a complete example to illustrate how to use a simple Gaussian
model written in C++ with ABCpy. First, have a look at our C++ model:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_cpp/gaussian_model_simple.cpp
   :language: c++
   :lines: 9 - 17

To use this code in Python, we need to specify exactly how to expose the C++
function to Python. Therefore, we write a Swig interface file that look as
follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_cpp/gaussian_model_simple.i
   :language: c++

In the first line we define the module name we later have to import in your
ABCpy Python code. Then, in curly brackets, we specify which libraries we want
to include and which function we want to expose through the wrapper.

Now comes the tricky part. The model class expects a method `simulate` that
forward-simulates our model and which returns an array of syntetic
observations. However, C++/C does not know the concept of returning an array,
instead in C++/C we would provide a memory position (pointer) where to write
the results. Swig has to translate between the two concepts. We use actually an
Swig interface definition from numpy called `import_array`. The line

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_cpp/gaussian_model_simple.i
   :language: c++
   :lines: 18

states that we want the two parameters `result` and `k` of the `gaussian_model`
C++ function be interpreted as an array of length k that is returned. Have a
look at the Python code below and observe how the wrapped Python function takes only two
instead of four parameters and returns a numpy array.

The first stop to get everything running is to translate the Swig interface file
to wrapper code in C++ and Python.
::

   swig -python -c++ -o gaussian_model_simple_wrap.cpp gaussian_model_simple.i

This creates two wrapper files `gaussian_model_simple_wrap.cpp` and
`gaussian_model_simple.py`. Now the C++ files can be compiled:
::
   
   g++ -fPIC -I /usr/include/python3.5m -c gaussian_model_simple.cpp -o gaussian_model_simple.o
   g++ -fPIC -I /usr/include/python3.5m -c gaussian_model_simple_wrap.cpp -o gaussian_model_simple_wrap.o
   g++ -shared gaussian_model_simple.o gaussian_model_simple_wrap.o -o _gaussian_model_simple.so

Note that the include paths might need to be adapted to your system. Finally, we
can write a Python model which uses our C++ code:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_cpp/pmcabc-gaussian_model_simple.py
   :language: python
   :lines: 3 - 32

The important lines are where we import the wrapper code as a module (line 2) and call
the respective model function (line -2).

The full code is available in `examples/extensions/models/gaussion_cpp/`. To
simplify compilation of SWIG and C++ code we created a Makefile. Note that you
might need to adapt some paths in the Makefile.
	    
Wrap a Model Written in R
-------------------------

Statisticians often use the R language to build statistical models. R models can
be incorporated within the ABCpy language with the `rpy2` Python package. We
show how to use the `rpy2` package to connect with a model written in R.

Continuing from the previous sections we use a simple Gaussian model as an
example. The following R code is the contents of the R file `gaussian_model.R`:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_R/gaussian_model.R
    :language: R
    :lines: 1 - 4

More complex R models are incorporated in the same way. To include this function
within ABCpy we include the following code at the beginning of our Python
file:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_R/gaussian_model.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 5 - 14

This imports the R function `simple_gaussian` into the Python environment. We
need to build our own model to incorporate this R function as in the previous
section. The only difference is the `simulate` method of the class `Gaussian'.

.. automethod:: abcpy.models.Model.simulate
   :noindex:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/extensions/models/gaussian_R/gaussian_model.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 40 - 42

The default output for R functions in Python is a float vector. This must be
converted into a Python list for the purposes of ABCpy.


..
  Extending: Add your Distance
  ============================
  TBD
  Extending: Add your Statistics
  ==============================
  TBD
  Extending: Add your approx_likelihood
  =====================================
  TBD
  Extending: Add you prior
  ========================
  TBD
  Extending: Add your own inference scheme
  ========================================
  TBD
  Use ABCpy with a C++ model
  ==========================
  TBD


